The Joe Rogan experience. The what,
what are the misconceptions of you? Cause here's, here's the,
if you go to the knee jerk, conservative reaction,
you talk to people who are not interested in anyone that wants to be a
democratic socialist. They hear the name, Bernie Sanders,
the negative implications are that you are somehow or another going to take
their money. Right? Did you that annoying to you?
Yes, it is. Of course it is. And also that I missed the Maduro. I'm a dictator,
I'd love dictatorships and all that stuff.
And the truth is Joe,
that if you look at the issues that I can't pan on and what I believe on,
they are really not terribly radical.
They exist in many countries all over the world. For example,
just we can start on healthcare. If you'd like,
is the idea that healthcare is a human, right? Not a privilege, a radical idea.
I don't think it is. It's not.
And the truth is we are the only major country on earth.
Many people don't know this. We're the only major country on earth,
not to guarantee healthcare to all people as a human, right?
And yet we end up spending almost twice as much per capita on healthcare,
the function. And you can argue with me if you want,
but the function of the current healthcare system is not to provide quality care
at all.
It is to make tens of billions of dollars in profit for the drug companies and
the insurance companies. That's the function.
If you go to Canada and I live 50 miles away from the Canadian border,
you have major heart surgery. You were in the hospital for a month.
Do you know what the bill is? When you're going out zero, you got it.
You go to any doctor you want, you don't have to take out your wallet.
And yet they guarantee healthcare to all of their people and they spend one half
of what we spend. That's kind of what I want to do.
And I don't think that that's terribly radical. We have a program now,
which everybody knows it's called Medicare was started by Lyndon Johnson back in
1965. It is a popular program.
All that I want to do over a four year period is to expand the today eligibility
age of 65. I want to take it out of the 55, 45, 35,
everybody over four year period. That's about it.
And I want to expand benefits to include a dental care hearing aids on
eyeglasses, uh, as well. That's about it. Not too radical.
Well, that doesn't sound radical at all. No. When you say that they,
that Canada spends less, obviously they have less people.
You mean less per capita.
Half per capita,
exactly per capita and the quality of camp is as good or better.
Do they have problems? Yeah, they have problems. Everybody has problems,
but overall,
the healthcare experts will tell you the quality of care there is as good or
better than it is in our country. So what's the hurdle. Okay.
I'll tell you exactly what the hurdles, the hurdle is. Exactly.
The same thing is in every other aspect of our lives, it's the power of money.
All right, listen to this. Over the last 20 years,
the drug companies alone have spent four and a half
billion dollars in 20 years on lobbying and campaign contributions.
That's what we're up against the knowledge.
And I mark my words within a short period of time,
you will see TV ads in California, all over this country,
demonizing Bernie Sanders. He wants to do this terrible thing to you.
He wants to do that. They have unbelievable amounts of money. Uh,
and politicians are frightened of that power. Give you one example. Uh,
back in 2016,
I got involved here in a little way with an effort on the part of the nurses to
control of the cost of prescription drugs in California.
You may recall that effort. I did it.
It was a ballot item in one state here in California.
Do you know how much the drug companies alone spent at the feet that epic,
they spent $131 million on one ballot item in one state.
All right, last year,
the top 10 drug companies made $69 billion a week ago.
I went to Canada with a number of Americans who are dealing with diabetes.
We bought insulin in Windsor, Ontario for one 10th, the price,
10% of the price, same exact product being charged at America.
So you got drug companies that are engaged in collusion and in price fixing
who are incredibly greedy. And the result is many elderly people,
many working people simply cannot afford the medicine. They need it.
This is it's unbelievable.
And the reason for all of that stuff is we are the only country in the world
that does not negotiate with the drug companies.
They can charge you any price they want.
And that has to do with the fact that we don't have a national healthcare
program. Medicare is not negotiating, et cetera.
Is this something that can really be implemented inside of four years?
It's an enormous endeavor.
I want you to think back. Think back, Joe, in 1965, uh,
you had Linda Johnson is president. And by the way,
this idea of national health care,
this has been talked about literally since Teddy Roosevelt is not a new concept.
Healthcare is human rights is what Teddy Roosevelt was talking about.
That's what FDR was talking about. Harry Truman was talking about it.
Kennedy was talking about it. Kennedy got killed.
Lyndon Johnson picked up the mantle and their idea was according to people in
their administration, we'll start with the elderly who are most impacted by,
by healthcare costs and sickness will start.
And they did in 1965, without the technology we have today,
they implemented Medicare, 19 million people,
elderly people signed up in the first year.
So if you could slot a brand new program and have 19 million people
sign up with a technology that is way, way behind where we are today.
Why can't we over a four year period simply expand that program.
I don't think it's such a difficult operation.
So when you talk about the drug companies and the lobbyists and the enormous
amount of money that they spend is this,
does this exist anywhere else other than the United States lobbyists on that
level? No.
No, of course not. Uh, and the reason, you know, in Canada,
what you have is you have a national healthcare program and so forth and they
sit down and they negotiate with the drug companies.
They have their own approach,
but every other major country on earth says to the drug companies,
of course you can't charge us any price you want. This is a reasonable price.
Tell me what your profits are, what your expenditures are.
This is a price for us. You can walk in, you know, if you have an illness,
you could walk into the pharmacy tomorrow and the price has been doubled.
And you say to the pharmacist, what happened?
He said they just raised their prices. They could do it any day.
They want any price they want.
No lobbyists are in general. When people talk about lobbyists,
it's a, it's an unattractive term. We think a bit in terms of a negative,
we don't, we don't think of, oh, thank God. There's lobbyists. We think, wow.
There's someone with enormous amounts of money using that money to gain
influence on politicians. And it shapes regular people.
It shapes our lives mostly in a negative way.
This is the way most people look at it. I'm not saying it's correct. Why,
why do we have that system in place? Like, why do we have lobbyists?
Why is it legal for someone to spend exorbitant amount of money,
exorbitant amounts of money to affect our civilization,
to affect the way our culture.
I know you've taken us into a whole new area. All right, let's look,
can I let me detour? And I'll come back to
Today in America,
you got three people owning more wealth than the bottom half of the American
society. You don't see that on television too much. Yeah, no,
you don't three people. You got the top 1% owning more wealth than the bottom.
92%. Listen to this. This is a statistic we recently saw,
came from the federal reserve over the last 30 years.
The top 1% has seen a $21 trillion increase in their wealth.
The bottom half of America has seen a $900 billion decline in their wealth.
So what you have in America today is a relatively small number of
incredibly wealthy people. And I deal with these guys. Everyday.
People are always talking about rich. You don't know what rich is,
what multi-billion dollar operations are incredible power
over our society. And if you wasn't in pharmaceutical industry, and last year,
10 companies made $69 billion in profit.
You're sitting around right now saying, all right, that's great.
How do we do better next year?
What strategy do we have we to put a lot of ads on we're going to work with
others during the CNN debate that I participated in recently in the debate,
right? In the middle of the debate,
the drug companies and the insurance companies had an ad telling how bad
so-called, how bad better care for all would be. So they they're smart guys.
And they use their power over politicians. They use their power over the media.
They spend billions of dollars on advertising on media to make sure that they
make as much as they can in profit, but it's not any different with wall street.
It's not any different than the fossil fuel industry or the prison industrial
complex. These guys have wealth,
they have power and they could care less about the needs of working people in
this country. And that's the dynamic of American politics right now.
And in our campaign, look, we're taking them all on.
I know what makes a lot of people uncomfortable,
but we are taking on all of these entities and all of their wealth and all of
their power. And that's what a political revolution is about.
So the real problem seems to be that they have this strategy of unlimited
growth.
Not that they're not providing medication that people need to save their lives.
I mean, it's obviously important to have pharmaceutical company, of course,
of course. Right? So there's good that they provide,
but the business aspect of it is where the problem lies. Right?
Right. Look, they have great researchers,
but if you check how they even spend their money, you know,
they will tell you this, all of them, when you got research to develop,
we're charged with tackling cancer, we're tackling diabetes.
Alzheimer's the truth is of course, Leo,
but the bulk of their money is going often to what we call me-too drugs.
They make modest changes on a drug,
which really doesn't improve people's wellbeing in order to make profits.
So the answer is, yes, we need obviously vigorous research and development.
And by the way, your tax dollars,
all of our tax policy often goes to that research and we don't get the benefit
of it in terms of lower prices. So.
So it's just, it's a business model issue. It's a greed issue. You've got it.
And how would one stop that when you're dealing with this kind of influence that
you're talking about with $69 billion in a year, I mean the resources they have,
how would you stop that?
Well, that is kind of what we call the $64 question.
And I'll tell you what I think this is what I believe.
If you think back on American history,
and you think about the real changes that have taken place since society,
you think about the labor movement and working class people standing up and
saying to their employers, we're not going to be treated like animals anymore.
You can't hire and fire as you can't work. As you know, 15 hours a day, we, we,
we deserve dignity. And you think about the growth of the labor movement,
millions of people,
beginning to slam together and fight you think about the civil rights movement,
you know, and it wasn't just Dr. Martin Luther king, Jr. It was again,
millions of African-Americans in their white allies saying we're going to end
segregation and racism in this country. Think about the women's movement.
A hundred years ago, women in America didn't even have the right to vote.
Think about the gay rights movement. Think about the environmental.
The only way that change takes place is when ordinary people come together
and stand up and fight and say that the status quo is not working.
And that's what I believe. And that's what we're trying to do. So with the,
the message of our campaign is it's us, not me,
cause I can't do it alone. Let me be very honest with you.
If I were elected president tomorrow,
I can't do the things that I would like to do that I'm campaigning on.
Unless millions of people will working with me to tell the corporate elite that
they cannot get at all.